Sports Authority of India (SAI) has presence across India. It provides training
facilities to athletes right from the grass-root level through to the elite level. It is observed that
there is a tendency of creating sports infrastructure facilities of the highest international
standards irrespective of the level of athlete / training for which it is intended. This not only
increases the initial cost but also leads to higher operations and maintenance cost.
2. It is necessary to understand that each International Sports Federation prescribes
specifications for the Field of Play depending upon the level of competitions; the standards
are higher for global level as compared to national level and still lower for sub-national level.
The “Lux” of artificial lighting, the height of Indoor hall etc. can be lowered; the specifications
of infrastructure facilities can also be lowered for training purpose and the ‘Run offs’ can be
reduced for the sports discipline, which in turn reduces the area required for the Field of Play.
3. During my visit to various SAI centers across the country, it was observed that often
coaches and administrators were not fully aware of Field of Play specifications. This
handbook aims to serve as a ready reckoner on Field of Play specifications for different sport
disciplines.
4. The instant compilation covers major sports played in India. The combat sports have
not yet been included. Subsequently, endeavors will be made to cover field of play of
remaining sport disciplines and also cover specifications of equipment used in various
sport disciplines.
5. Though all efforts have been made to ensure the correctness of the information,
however, since this is the first publication, any shortcoming may be informed to SAI through
e-mail at infradivisionsai@gmail.com.
6. Director / SE (Infrastructure) of Sports Authority of India has compiled the proposed
specifications for SAI Regional Centres, Academic Institutions, STCs and SAGs after studying
the norms prescribed by respective International Sports Federation. I sincerely hope that the
publication serves the purpose for which it has been prepared.
INJETI SRINIVAS, IAS
 Director General
 Sports Authority of India
- 5 -
PREFACE
SAI has presence PAN India. SAI centers are located in urban/rural areas and remote
locations all across India, and have trainees of all stature right from novice to elite level training
in SAI facilities.
It is observed that SAI centers/construction agencies are creating infrastructure with very high
specifications in an arbitrary manner, irrespective of the stature of trainees who will be using
these facilities. This, has resulted in higher infrastructure cost and at times the approved cost
has also exceeded. Moreover, the annual maintenance cost is also high.
We tend to create infrastructures of international standards despite the fact that the facilities
shall not be used even by National campers or elite athletes. The guidelines or rules on Field
of Play from International Federations on respective sports discipline are intended to provide
the best possible environment for competitions at international level and training for these
international competitions. These Rules are not intended to govern issues related to the
general public or training at grass root or even at community level.
The space required for most games depends on the standard of play; generally the higher the
standard the larger the space. The playing areas are usually the same size but increased
safety margins/run offs and clear height may be required for international events.. For most
competition play an extra zone is required for team benches and an officials’ table and a
further security zone between teams and spectators may be required for major events. Adding
these margins around the playing area produces the critical overall space. However these
additional margins are not required for SAI Training Centres. The minimum safe area for each
standard of sportsactivities undertaken by the young trainees at our SAI Training Centers is
much less than what is required for international competitions.
In view of the above, it is considered necessary to streamline the specifications to be provided
for infrastructure facilities and compile guidelines on field of plays notified by respective
international federations for various SAI centers/STC/SAG, all over India.
SANJIV BARANWAL, IDSE
Director/SE Infrastructure
 Sports Authority of India
- 6 -
FEDERATION OF INTERNATIONAL HOCKEY
(FIH)
HOCKEY
- 7 -
1 HOCKEY
1.1 Field of play (Compiled from FIH Handbook)
The information below provides a simplified description of the field of play.
 The field of play is rectangular, 91.40 metres long and 55.00 metres wide.
 Side-lines mark the longer perimeters of the field
 Backlines mark the shorter perimeters of the field.
 The goal-lines are the parts of the back-lines between the goal-posts.
 A centre-line is marked across the middle of the field.
 Lines known as 23 metres lines are marked across the field22.90 metres from each
back-line.
 Areas referred to as the circles are marked inside the field around the goals and
opposite the centres of the backlines.
 Penalty spots 150 mm in diameter are marked in front of the centre of each goal with
the centre of each spot 6.40metres from the inner edge of the goal-line.
 All lines are 75 mm wide and are part of the field of play.
 Flag-posts between 1.20 and 1.50 metres in height are placed at each corner of the
field.
 Goals are positioned outside the field of play at the centre of and touching each backline.
 Broken lines are marked with their outer edges 5 meters from the outer edge of each
circle-line; These broken lines became mandatory for international matches with effect
from 1 June 2000. Their adoption for other matches is at the discretion of National
Associations
 The playing surface must continue (to create “run-off” areas) for a minimum of 2
metres at the back-lines and 1 metre at the side-lines with an additional unobstructed
1 metre in each case (that is, a total of 3 metres at the ends and 2 metres at the sides
of the field). These are minimum requirements with the respective recommended
areas being 3 plus 2 metres and 2 plus 1 metres (that is, a total of 5 metres at the
ends and 3metres at the sides of the field).
Note: These unobstructed areas may be surfaced with material different to the synthetic
playing surface and may accommodate structures and/or fittings such as drain covers or
covered reticulation channels.
- 8 -
Figure 1: Field of Play (compiled from FIH Rule Handbook)
- 9 -
Field Dimensions
1.2 Pitch Orientation: To create the minimum of dazzle from the setting sun, the FIH
recommends that pitches be orientated as close as possible north-south. At latitudes
further from the equator, the orientation can swing to up to 15º east or west of northsouth.
1.3 Pitch Classification: FIH has a classification system for synthetic pitches which fall
into two categories: Global and National. (Until April 2008, the National category was
called “Standard” and this terminology will still appear in some publications.)
The classification is based on a series of pitch performance requirements including the
behaviour of a hockey ball and drainage characteristics tested under carefully
controlled conditions on the finished pitch surface.
- 10 -
1.3.1 Global Category: Global category pitches are mandatory for all FIH world-level
competitions and qualifying tournaments such as:
· Olympic Games
· World Cups
· Junior World Cups
· Champions’ Trophies
· Champions’ Challenges
· FIH Olympic Games Qualifying Tournaments
· FIH World Cup Qualifying Tournaments
A global category pitch is also sometimes specified in continental or national tournament
regulations.
If it is not proposed to host one of the above events, it is not necessary to incur the
additional costs to achieve global category standards.
1.3.2 National Category:National category pitches are satisfactory for international matches
and/or tournaments other than those referred to above.
1.4 Selection of Turf Type: The level of hockey that is proposed for the venue will be a
major influence on the type of pitch surface to be laid. There are essentially two main
groups of pitch surface: natural grass and synthetic turf.
1.4.1 Natural Grass Pitches: There are many types of grass, and expert advice should
be sought to help in the choice of grass that is most suitable for a particular climate and
soil conditions. Similarly, advice on whether to seed the pitch or to lay sods should be
sought. The latter is far more expensive, but has the advantage that it can be played
on much sooner than a seeded area, which could require at least a year of careful
maintenance to become sufficiently established to permit safe play without causing
serious damage to the surface.
1.4.2 Synthetic (or Artificial) Turf Pitches There are a number of different types of
synthetic surface available. However the surfaces proposed to be used in SAI Centres
are considered here. This fall generally undergone of the following headings:
1.4.3 Filled surface: a surface (or carpet) comprising a synthetic yarn filled with sand (or
similar material) to the full height of the pile to help maintain its verticality. The pile
height is greatest in this type of surface. The sand is an important element. A high
quality material with well-rounded particles that allows adequate drainage at all times
and prevents compaction of the fill while under use is usually specified by the pitch
supplier.
- 11 -
A filled pitch rarely justifies the installation of a watering system. In moderate climates, the
sand within the turf carpet can remain slightly damp for much of the time. However, in warmer
climates, the pitch will dry out and some degree of watering will greatly improve its playing
characteristics. Hence, provision of some form of irrigation (even hand-held hoses) should be
seriously contemplated.
1.4.4 Water-based unfilled surface: a surface (or carpet) comprising a very dense synthetic
pile of short length. It is essential from the safety, comfort and playability points of view
that this type of surface is maintained wet during play. It also ensures that wear on the
turf carpet is minimised and the full expected life of the turf realised.
1.5 Pitch Irrigation or Watering
1.5.1 Sand-filled pitch: in most instances, such a pitch does not justify the expense of
installing a watering system. However, it is widely known that the pitch plays better
when the sand is slightly damp. Consideration should be given, therefore, to the
installation of a water source to enable hand-held hose watering to be carried out.
This is more important in hotter, drier parts of the world as the sand will certainly dry
out and tend to become “dust”. Watering will also improve the playing characteristics.
- 12 -
In more moderate climates, the sand remains damp for longer periods, so the need for
such watering will be significantly less.
1.5.2 Water-based unfilled pitch: it is considered essential that this type of pitch is watered
for every match. In fact, the FIH strongly discourages playing on an inadequately
watered unfilled pitch. There are four main reasons for this:
 greater risk of injury to players;
 the playability of the pitch is affected: the ball does not travel truly and is more
likely to bounce dangerously;
 greater wear is caused to the pitch surface, considerably shortening the life of
the turf, and could affect the manufacturer’s warranty;
 Pitch surface temperatures, particularly in hot climates, can rise to unhealthy
levels.
1.6 Pitch Carpet Materials (Yarns)
Historically, turf yarns have been made from nylon, polypropylene or polyethylene, or a
combination of those. There are some differences in performance characteristics
between them and these are discussed below. The FIH does not specify any one type
of yarn; its technical requirements are purely performance based,
None of the yarn material is completely UV-resistant, but polypropylene is probably the
best of the three, followed by polyethylene. So for hot, sunny climates, either of these
two yarns may be considered.
The majority of FIH approved manufacturers appears to be moving from polypropylene
to polyethylene yarns because the latter have an improved slide factor, which in turn
requires the application of less water. This indicates that substantial savings in water
quantity for irrigation can be realised without any consequential adverse effects on
pitch playability or player comfort and safety
1.7 Carpet Manufacture
FIH makes no recommendation with regard to the various treatments to the yarn or the
processes to form the turf carpet. For example, the yarn may be twisted, curled,
fibrillated, multiplied or have other treatments before it is looped or knitted into a preformed backing fabricant then cut to the desired length. The backing fabric is then
sealed. Manufacture is by weaving, tufting or knitting to the density required for the
particular type of surface.
- 13 -
1.8 Shock-pads: Shock pad is the resilient material under the synthetic turf carpet
designed to absorb kinetic energy. Sometimes referred to as ‘Shock Absorbing Layer’,
‘Elastic Layer’ or ‘E-Layer’. Early synthetic turfs were laid without a shock-pad. It is now
recommended that all synthetic pitches be laid with shock-pad as it will help to absorb
the impact (dynamic forces) of players running on the surface and reduce the incidence
of lower limb injuries. In fact, the FIH now makes a shock-pad mandatory for any pitch
to become classified under its listing. It is recommended to provide In-situ pad, as this
is manufactured on site using a hot mix of rubber shred or crumbs, bound with
polyurethane. It is laid using a highway paving machine. The advantage of this system
is that the pad can be of variable thickness to even out any imperfections in the level of
the underlying base, and can produce a smooth finish on which to lay the turf carpet.
It is recommended that the pitch surface and shock-pad be laid on a properly designed and
engineered base and, where necessary, a sub-base. The base should comprise a layer of
graded stone (which includes the drainage system) overlain by a layer (preferably two layers)
of bituminous material. Carried out properly, the base will outlast by several times the life of
the shock-pad and surface carpet.
- 14 -
PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENT OF SYNTHETIC TURF (PRODUCT)
- 15 -
PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENT OF SYNTHETIC TURF (INSTALLED PITCH)
- 16 -
Recommendations
 Global Category Turf (water based) is recommended to be used in
• Regional Centers /Academic Institution
• STCs/SAGs where the synthetic turf is used by National Campers/Elite Trainees
(with the approval of DG SAI)
 National Category Turf (Non water based) is recommended to be used in all other
locations
 Grass Turf : is recommended to be used in remote SAI Centers and other
STCs/SAGs where synthetic turf could not be laid due to budget constraint
Note:
 Preferred Synthetic turf yarns are polypropylene or polyethylene.
 The turf carpet can be made in various ways but the product must be approved
by FIH.
- 17 -
 The shock-pad can be constructed in various ways, but an in-situ pad is
generally preferred.
 Automatic single key operated pop up sprinkler system recommended with
similar specifications as installed in MDCN Stadium
 The relative costing is as under:
• Sand–filled Turf (National Category) is about 20% cheaper than Water-based
un-filled Turf (Global Category) and does not require a sprinkler system
• Grass Turf is about 80% cheaper than Global category turf
The ‘Run off’ beyond side lines and back line should be provided as under:
• Run off beyond Side lines: Minimum 2 mt, Surface Area up to 1 mt should be
of same specifications as field of play and beyond that it may be of any
specification like asphalt, Plain Cement Concrete(PCC), old synthetic turf
(without shock pad) over asphalt base/PCC
• Run off beyond Back lines: Minimum 3 mt, Surface Area up to 2 mt should be
of same specifications as field of play and beyond that it may be of any
specification like asphalt, Plain Cement Concrete(PCC), old synthetic turf
(without shock pad) over asphalt base/PCC etc
Note: With the above recommendation total area of Field of Play will be
reduced by approx 950 sqmt which will amount to a saving of approx Rs
60 – 70 lakhs
Proposed layout of a Field of Play (Hockey)
- 18 -
1.9 CHECKLIST FOR THE INSTALLATION OF A SYNTHETIC HOCKEY
TURF
When the project is sanctioned, a Project Management Group (PMG) is constituted under the
chairmanship of SAI centre-in-charge under whose area the synthetic hockey surface is being
laid. Other members of the PMG shall comprise of experts in the field of hockey, hockey
coach posted in the centre, officer entrusted with monitoring of infra works in the centre and a
representative of PWO/Govt. construction agency entrusted with the work.
Checklist as under has been prepared as guidelines for the PMG to monitor the work::
a) Tender / Contract: PMG to check and confirm from Public Works Organization/PWO,
assigned the work that Tender / Contract to FIH approved registered manufacturer or
their subsidiary companies only.
b) Product / Surface: Product considered in the tender documents is approved by FIH.
PMG to take an extract of latest certified list of manufacturers published by FIH from
the PWO for record
c) Architectural Plan/Layout of the Surface and Field events: PMG to give the
proposed scope of work to the PWO for preparing the layout/Architectural plan of the
Hockey surface . PWO will prepare the layout plan along with the services like
drainage/ water supply/Electrical supply lines duly marked and take the approval of the
PMG before execution. However it should be ensured that the sanctioned cost of the
project is not exceeded.
d) It is the responsibility of the PWO to ensure that the work is executed as per the layout
plan approved by the PMG. Any changes in the layout plan during execution stage
should be recorded and approved by the PMG, to avoid dispute
e) All the technical/structural aspect related to the construction of the hockey surface is
the responsibility of the PWO.
f) Since the work is assigned to the PWO, as a deposit work, the funds are to be
released in advance by the SAI centre in charge to the PWO. To ensure that there is
no blockage of funds and also the progress of work is not effected due to lack of funds,
a three months advance may be released by the SAI Centre in charge as per demand
of the PWO.
g) PMG to meet every fortnight at the site to ensure that the project is being executed as
envisaged, resolve any pending issue hampering the work and assess the release of
funds.
- 19 -
h) PWO should submit the details of installation process of the synthetic turf by the
manufacturer, along with the list of items and its quantities to be imported to the PMG.
i) Funds are to be released in advance to the PWO for opening of Letter of Credit for
placing order for imported items. PWO to ensure that the Govt, interest is protected
and the Bank Guarantees’ are taken from the manufacturer, as per the procedure
being followed by CPWD in similar cases.
j) PMG should compare the list of items and quantities of the supply order with
that required for the work as per the installation process of the manufacturer.
k) Custom duty exemption certificate (CDEC), to be issued by the SAI centre in charge as
per the invoice. The CDEC should be issued in time else demurrage charges will have
to be paid, which is construed as loss to state. Before issue of CDEC, invoice of the
items and quantity received should again be verified with the earlier list
submitted by PWO (Refer, h, I, j above)
l) Before laying of the Shock absorbing layer and synthetic surface, the following checks
should be carried out by the PMG and kept on record:
 The surface area should be flooded with water, to ensure there is no stagnation
 The layout of the Hockey surface is as earlier approved by the PMG. However
PWO shall be responsible for all the dimensions and slopes
m) PMG should ensure that the synthetic surface should be laid directly by the
manufacture through their approved applicator only as per their installation
manual.
n) Testing: FIH accredited laboratory should test the surface and FIH certification should
be submitted to the PMG for record.
o) Sprinkler System: Single key, fully automatic computerized sprinkler system should
be installed, which should cover the entire ground in the normal windy conditions also.
The specifications of sprinkler system should be similar to the one laid for hockey turf
in Major Dhyanchand National Stadium New Delhi
p) Video clippings of installation process , line marking and FIH certification
process may be made and kept on record for future references
- 20 -
1.10. SYNTHETIC HOCKEY SURFACE MANUFACTURER AND THEIR INDIAN
REPRESENTATIVE FOR TURFS LAID IN INDIA.
S.
No. NAME OF MANUFACTURER INDIAN REPRESENTATIVE NAME OF
BRAND
1
CC Grass
F/5, Sports Center Business Building, No 1-6
Wutaishan, Nanjing 210029
Jiangsu , CHINA
Tel: +86 25 86556028-8025
Email: info@ccgrass.com
Shiv Naresh Sports Pvt. Ltd.
E-23, Milan Cinema Road, Karampura,
Opposite Karampura Post Office, New
Delhi, Delhi 110015
011 2543 0429
shivnareshsports@shivnareshsports.com
Green HF
2
Desso Sports Systems BV (NV)
Robert Ramlotstraat 89, 9200 Dendermonde
BELGIUM
Tel: +32 52 262 660
Email: pvreijen@desso.com
Sportina Exim Pvt. Ltd.
218 Champaklal Estate, Sion Circle, Sion,
Mumbai - 400022, Near Cinemax Cinema
+(91)-22-38566057
DD Sportilux SL
3
FIELDTURF TARKETT
2 rue de l’Egalite, 92748 Nanterre Cedex, France,
Tel: 33 1 4120 4382
E-mail:- benjamin.chardon@tarkett.com
Great Sports Infra
Flat No. 101, Plot No.52, Street Number 2,
Chikoti Gardens, Begumpet, Hyderabad,
Telangana 500016
Phone: 040 2776 4900
E-mail:- info@greatsportsinfra.com
HOCKEY GOLD
4
Greenfield BV
Nylonstraat 7 , 8281 JX Genemuiden ,Netherlands
Tel: +31 38 3372010
Email: info@greenfields.eu
Syncott International
J - 219, Lane W-15, Western Avenue Sainik
Farms, New Delhi, Delhi 110062
Phone: 011 2955 5390
E-mail:- seema@syncotts.com
Greenfields TX
5
Grass Manufacturers Pty Ltd.
Unit 8.1, 1A Hale Street, Portair Industrial Estate,
NSW 2109, Australia
Tel: +61 2 9316 7244
E-mail:- brent@grassman.com.au
Maverick Turf Corporation
456/C, 2nd Floor, 14th Main, 9th Cross,
2nd Phase, J.P.Nagar, Bengaluru,
Karnataka 560078
Tel : 098453 69337
info@maverickturf.com
Tru Play
6
POLYTAN/ STI
Mr. Stephen Niven, CEO
Suit 504, 5/F, Chinachem Leighton Plaza,
29 Leighton Road, Causeway Bay, Hong Kong
Tel (852) 2882 3655 / Fax (852) 28823825
E-Mail:- sniven@polytan.com.au
Advanced Sport Technologies LLP
2277, Raja Park, Rani Bagh,
New Delhi - 110034
Tel No. 011-29232939 / 41650045
E-Mail:- info@ast-sports.com
POLIGRAS
7
Suntex Sports Turf (Kunshan) Corp.
No 188 Shengxi Road Economic & Technical
Development Zone, Kunshan City, Jiangsu Province,
CHINA
Tel: +86 512 577 19988
Email: suntex@suntex88.com
Chadha Sports
109, Bhagat Singh Market, New Delhi -
110001
Ph. No. 011-23363084
chadhasportsmail@yahoo.com
STH-13
8
Tiger Turf
229 IKON, Droitwich Road, Hartlebury
Worcestershire, DY10 4EU
United Kingdom
Tel: +44 1299 25 39 66
Email: info@tigerturf.co.uk
Altius Sports & Leisure Pvt. Ltd.
B1/30, Hauz Khas, Aurobindo Marg, New
Delhi, Delhi 110016
Tel:- 011- 2656 1112
nasir.ali@altiussports.com
Tiger Turf TT37
Note:- The above list is just for information. The Indian representative may change with time. There
are other manufactures of Synthetic Hockey Turf for with FIH manual can be referred.
- 21 -
INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION
OF
ATHLETICS FEDERATIONS
(IAAF)
ATHLETIC TRACK
- 22 -
2. IAAF (International Association of Athletic Federation)
In order to comply with modern standards of construction, the International Association of
Athletics Federations decided to publish this “Track and Field Facilities Manual” in addition to
the IAAF Competition Rules. The manual contains detailed and more clearly defined
specifications for the planning and construction of Track and Field facilities than those
contained in the IAAF Competition Rules. The aim is to pay greater attention to technical and
performance requirements of Track and Field facilities.
2.1 TYPES OF CERTIFICATES
IAAF (International Association of Athletic Federation) approves the Athletic
track based on laid down performance standards. IAAF issues two types of
certificates:
• IAAF Class 1 Athletics Facility Certificate : Required for Outdoor competitions held
under Rule 1.1 (a) i.e. competitions included in the World Athletics Series and the
Athletics Programme of the Olympic Games
• IAAF Class 2 Athletics Facility Certificate : Required for all facilities intended for
use for outdoor competitions under Rule 1.1(b) to (j) like :
a) The Athletics of Area, Regional or Group Games not confined to participants
from a single area where the IAAF does not have exclusive control.
b) Regional or Group Championships in Athletics not confined to participants from
a single Area.
c) Matches between teams from different Areas representing Members or Areas or
combinations thereof) International Invitation Meetings and competitions which
are categorised by IAAF as part of the global structure and approved by the
Council.
d) Area Championships and other intra-Area competitions organised by an Area
Association.
e) The Athletics programme of Area, Regional or Group Games, and Regional or
Group Championships in Athletics confined to participants from one Area.
f) Matches between teams representing two or more Members or combinations
thereof within the same Area, with the exception of Youth and Junior category
competitions.
g) International Invitation Meetings and competitions, other than those referred to
in Rule 1.1(e), where appearance fees, prize money and/or the value of noncash prizes exceed USD 50,000 in total, or USD 8,000 for any one event.
j) Area programmes similar to those referred to in Rule 1.1(e).
- 23 -
In simple words all the competitions up to Commonwealth Games require only class II
certified surfaces.
All synthetic Athletic tracks laid or to be laid in SAI centres are proposed to comply
with IAAF Class II Athletics Facility Certificate with the exception of major competitions
facility like JNS, New Delhi.
It is normal for an athletics track to be used for other sports. Generally, this involves using the
interior of the 400m tracks as a pitch for soccer, American football or rugby. The Athletic track
is therefore designed for multipurpose facilities with playing fields inside. To accommodate the
playing fields inside, 400 m Oval Track can be of various shapes/types as under:
- 24
-
- 25 -
2.2 COMPETITION AREA
General Remarks
Track and Field athletics include competition areas for running, walking, jumping and
throwing events. These are normally integrated into an arena, the design of which is
dictated by the 400m oval track. The dimensions given are to be adhered to.
Permissible deviations are given as tolerances (+ or ± or –) after each figure. All linear
measurements and levels shall be made to the nearest whole mm.
IAAF Manual stipulates dimensions and equipment for international and other high
class competition by elite athletes. For club and school competitions, the dimensions of
horizontal jumps landing areas, distance to take-off boards, the lengths of runways,
dimensions of landing areas etc. may be reduced. The safety of athletes must be
paramount in making such decisions. If you are in doubt as to what is appropriate
consult your national athletics federation.
- 26 -
2.3 TYPES OF COMPETITION FACILITIES (Compiled from IAAF Manual)
1.14.1 Competition Area for Track Events includes:
 Oval track with at least 4 lanes (400m + 0.04m x 1.22m ± 0.01m) and safety zones
measuring not less than 1.00m on the inside and preferably 1.00m on the outside
 Straight with at least 6 lanes (100m + 0.02m x 1.22m ± 0.01m for sprints and 110m
+ 0.02m x 1.22m ± 0.01m for hurdles)
Starting area: 3m min. (for 110m Hurdles, category V 2.5m min.).
Run-out: 17m min.
 Steeplechase track as for oval track with a permanent water jump (3.66m x3.66m x
0.50m-0.70m) placed inside or outside the second bend
2.3.1 Competition Area for Jumping Events
The competition area for jumping events includes:
• Facility for Long Jump with runway (40m min. x 1.22m ± 0.01m), take-off
board(1.22m ± 0.01m x 0.20m ± 0.002m x 0.10m max.), placed between 1m
and 3mfrom the nearer end of the landing area, and the landing area 2.75m
min. wide with the far end at least 10m min. from the take-off line).
• Facility for Triple Jump as for Long Jump except for a take-off board
placed13m min. for men or 11m min. for women from the nearer end of the
landing area for international competitions. For any other competition, this
distance shall be appropriate for the level of competition.
• Facility for High Jump with a semicircular runway (radius 20m min.) and
landing area (6m x 4m min.).
• Facility for Pole Vault with a runway (40m min. x 1.22m ± 0.01m), a box for
inserting the pole and landing area (6m x 6m min.) with an additional forward
extension.
2.3.2 Competition Area for Throwing Events
The competition area for throwing events includes:
 Facility for Discus Throw with throwing circle (2.50m ± 0.005m diameter),protective
cage and landing sector (80m radius, 48m chord)
 Facility for Hammer Throw with throwing circle (2.135m ± 0.005m
diameter),protective cage and landing sector (90m radius, 54m chord)
 Facility for Javelin Throw with runway (30m min. x 4m),